Merge and update `about-ql-packs` with `about-codeql-packs` (#10105)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-cli/about-codeql-packs.rst

You can use the package management commands in the CodeQL CLI to create CodeQL packs, add dependencies to packs, and install or update dependencies. For more information, see ":ref:`Creating and working with CodeQL packs <creating-and-working-with-codeql-packs>`." You can also publish and download CodeQL packs using the CodeQL CLI. For more information, see ":doc:`Publishing and using CodeQL packs <publishing-and-using-codeql-packs>`."

> The standard CodeQL packages for all supported languages are published in the `GitHub package registry <https://github.com/orgs/codeql/packages>`__.`

Author: Container registry is used elsewhere.

> The standard CodeQL packages for all supported languages are published in the `GitHub Container registry <https://github.com/orgs/codeql/packages>`__.

Reviewer: Those dates are expected: awkwardly the "published on" dates shown on the packages overview page are the dates of _first_ publication of each package, not the dates of publication of the most recent versions of those packages. If you click through to each package (e.g. https://github.com/orgs/codeql/packages/container/package/javascript-all), you will see the recent history of updates to the package.

> The standard CodeQL packages for all supported languages are published in the `GitHub Container registry <https://github.com/orgs/codeql/packages>`__.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for explaining. That seems like a confusing user experience 😞

The `CodeQL repository <https://github.com/github/codeql>`__ contains sources for the standard CodeQL packs for all supported languages.

.. _codeql-pack-structure:

CodeQL pack structure
---------------------

> A CodeQL pack must contain a file called ``qlpack.yml`` in its root directory. In the ``qlpack.yml`` file, the ``name:`` field must have a value that follows the format of ``<scope>/<pack>``, where ``<scope>`` is the GitHub organization or user account that the pack will be published to and ``<pack>`` is the name of the pack. Additionally, query packs contain a ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file that contains the resolved dependencies of the pack. This file is generated during a call to the ``codeql pack install`` command, is not meant to be edited by hand, and should be added to your version control system.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the reminder. 👍🏻

About ``qlpack.yml`` files
--------------------------

When executing query-related commands, CodeQL first looks in siblings of the installation directory (and their subdirectories) for ``qlpack.yml`` files.
Then it checks the package cache for CodeQL packs which have been downloaded. This means that when you are developing queries locally, the local packages
in the installation directory override packages of the same name in the package cache, so that you can test your local changes.

The metadata in each `qlpack.yml`` file tells
CodeQL how to compile any queries in the pack, what libraries the pack depends on, and where to
find query suite definitions.

The contents of the CodeQL pack (queries or libraries used in CodeQL analysis) is included in the same directory as ``qlpack.yml``, or its subdirectories.

> The location of ``qlpack.yml`` defines the library path for the content of the CodeQL pack. That is, for all ``.ql`` and ``.qll`` files in the pack, CodeQL will resolve all import statements relative to the ``qlpack.yml`` at the pack's root.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The directory containing the ``qlpack.yml`` file serves as the root directory for the content of the CodeQL pack. That is, for all ``.ql`` and ``.qll`` files in the pack, CodeQL will resolve all import statements relative to the directory containing ``qlpack.yml`` at the pack's root.
```

   * - Property
     - Example
     - Required by
     - Purpose
   * - ``name``

>      - .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure including code blocks tables this way will work. The Docs/Sphinx CI (if it runs) check should pick it up though.

Author: I checked locally and it is working, but I will be sure to check again.

Reviewer 4: Ah, I've also checked the preview and you're right. Ignore me.

Reviewer 4: I'll resolve the other comments related to this.

        name: octo-org/security-queries

     - All packs
     - The scope, where the CodeQL pack is published, and the name of the pack defined using alphanumeric characters and hyphens. It must be unique as CodeQL cannot differentiate between CodeQL packs with identical names. Use the pack name to specify queries to run using ``database analyze`` and to define dependencies between CodeQL packs (see examples below).
   * - ``version``

>      - .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer 4: Another bullet point/code-block combo.

Reviewer 4: I was wrong. See above.

        version: 0.0.0

     - All packs
     - A semantic version for this CodeQL pack that must adhere to the `SemVer v2.0.0 specification <https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>`__.
   * - ``dependencies``

>      - .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer 4: Another code-block in a table.

Reviewer 4: I was wrong. See above.

        dependencies:
          codeql/cpp-all: ^0.0.2

     - Packs that define CodeQL package dependencies on other packs
     - A map from pack references to the semantic version range that is compatible with this pack. Supported for CLI versions v2.6.0 and later.
   * - ``defaultSuiteFile``

>      - .. code-block:: yaml

Reviewer 4: Another code-block in a table.

Reviewer 4: I was wrong. See above.

The ``suites`` property indicates a directory where "well-known" query suites can be found. These suites can be used on the command line by referring to their name only, rather than their full path. For more information about query suites, see ":doc:`Creating CodeQL query suites <creating-codeql-query-suites>`."

CodeQL packs for custom tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For custom CodeQL packs containing test files, you also need to include an
``extractor`` property so that the ``test run`` command knows how to create test
databases. You may also wish to specify the ``tests`` property.

.. include:: ../reusables/test-qlpack.rst

For more information about running tests, see ":doc:`Testing custom queries
<testing-custom-queries>`."

.. _standard-ql-packs:

Examples of CodeQL packs in the CodeQL repository

> ---------------------------------------------~~~~

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
--------------------------------------------------
```

   * - ``library``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        library: true

     - Library packs
     - A boolean value that indicates whether this pack is a library pack. Library packs do not contain queries and are not compiled. Query packs can ignore this field or explicitly set it to ``false``.
   * - ``suites``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        suites: octo-org-query-suites

     - Optional
     - The path to a directory in the pack that contains the query suites you want to make known to the CLI, defined relative to the pack directory. CodeQL pack users can run "well-known" suites stored in this directory by specifying the pack name, without providing their full path. This is not supported for CodeQL packs downloaded from the Container registry. For more information about query suites, see ":doc:`Creating CodeQL query suites <creating-codeql-query-suites>`."
   * - ``extractor``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        extractor: javascript

>      - All test packs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - All packs containing CodeQL tests
```

>      - The CodeQL language extractor to use when the CLI creates a database in the pack. For more information about testing queries, see ":doc:`Testing custom queries <testing-custom-queries>`."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - The CodeQL language extractor to use when running the CodeQL tests in the pack. For more information about testing queries, see ":doc:`Testing custom queries <testing-custom-queries>`."
```

   * - ``tests``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        tests: .

>      - Optional for test packs. Ignored for non-test packs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Optional for packs containing CodeQL tests. Ignored for packs without tests.
```

   * - ``license``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        license: MIT

     - All packs
     - Metadata that will be displayed on the packaging search page in the packages section of the account that the CodeQL pack is published to. For a list of allowed licenses, see `SPDX License List <https://spdx.org/licenses/>`__ in the SPDX Specification.
   * - ``description``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        description: Human-readable description of the contents of the CodeQL pack.

     - All packs
     - Metadata that will be displayed on the packaging search page in the packages section of the account that the CodeQL pack is published to.
   * - ``libraryPathDependencies``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        libraryPathDependencies: codeql/javascript-all

     - Optional, deprecated
     - Use the ``dependencies`` property instead. The names of any CodeQL packs that this CodeQL pack depends on, as an array. This gives the pack access to any libraries, database schema, and query suites defined in the dependency.

.. _about-codeql-pack-lock:

About ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` files
------------------------------------

> ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` files store the versions of the resolved transitive dependencies of a CodeQL pack. This file is created by the ``codeql pack install`` if it does not already exist and should be added to your version control system. The ``dependencies`` section of the ``qlpack.yml`` file contains version ranges that are compatible with the pack. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file locks the versions to precise dependencies. This ensures that anyone running ``codeql pack install`` on this the pack will always retrieve the same versions of dependencies even if newer compatible versions exist. Only query packs can have ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` files. This is because library packs are not compiled independently of query packs. Without being compiled, there is no need to specify precise versions of their dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` files store the versions of the resolved transitive dependencies of a CodeQL pack. This file is created by the ``codeql pack install`` command if it does not already exist and should be added to your version control system. The ``dependencies`` section of the ``qlpack.yml`` file contains version ranges that are compatible with the pack. The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file locks the versions to precise dependencies. This ensures that anyone running ``codeql pack install`` on this the pack will always retrieve the same versions of dependencies even if newer compatible versions exist.
```
Library packs do have lock files, at least in their source repo. This ensures deterministic pack resolution when running QL tests in library packs.

Author: Right. That's a subtlety that I forgot about. I will update this paragraph to make that clear.

> 

Author: https://github.com/github/codeql-team/issues/1208

Core library pack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here is an example ``qlpack.yml`` file for the `C/C++ analysis libraries
<https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/main/cpp/ql/lib/qlpack.yml>`__
core language pack:

.. code-block:: yaml

   name: codeql/cpp-all
   version: x.y.z-dev
   dbscheme: semmlecode.cpp.dbscheme
   library: true
   upgrades: upgrades

Some extra notes on the following properties:

- ``library``: Indicates that this is a library pack with no executable queries. It is only meant to be used as a dependency for other packs.
- ``dbscheme`` and ``upgrades``: These properties are internal to the CodeQL CLI and should only be defined in the core QL pack for a language.

.. _standard-codeql-query-packs:

Core query pack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here is an example ``qlpack.yml`` file for `C/C++ analysis queries
<https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/main/cpp/ql/src/qlpack.yml>`__
core query pack:

.. code-block:: yaml

   name: codeql/cpp-queries
   version: x.y.z-dev
   dependencies:
       codeql/cpp-all: "*"
       codeql/suite-helpers: "*"
   suites: codeql-suites
   defaultSuiteFile: codeql-suites/cpp-code-scanning.qls

Some extra notes on the following properties:

> - ``dependencies``: This query pack depends on ``codeql/cpp-all`` and ``codeql/suite-helpers``. Since these dependencies are resolved from source, it does not matter what version of the CodeQL pack they are compatible with.

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming that "resolved from source" becomes more obvious when we merge the PR about the CodeQL workspace.

Author: Since that article does not exist in this PR, I will add the link in the followup PR where the article is introduced.

   * - ``version``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        version: 0.0.0

     - All packs
     - A semantic version for this CodeQL pack that must adhere to the `SemVer v2.0.0 specification <https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>`__.
   * - ``dependencies``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        dependencies:
          codeql/cpp-all: ^0.0.2

     - Packs that define CodeQL package dependencies on other packs
     - A map from pack references to the semantic version range that is compatible with this pack. Supported from CLI version v2.6.0 and onwards.
   * - ``defaultSuiteFile``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        defaultSuiteFile: cpp-code-scanning.qls

     - Packs that export a set of default queries to run
     - The path to a query suite file containing all of the queries that are run by default when this pack is passed to the ``codeql database analyze`` command. Supported from CLI version v2.6.0 and onwards.
   * - ``defaultSuite``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        defaultSuite:
          queries: .
          exclude:
            precision: medium

>      - Packs that export a set of default queries to run

Author: Hmmm...yes. I thought it was in there, but I guess not. I will add.

     - All test packs
     - The CodeQL language extractor to use when the CLI creates a database in the pack. For more information about testing queries, see ":doc:`Testing custom queries <testing-custom-queries>`."
   * - ``tests``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        tests: .

     - Optional for test packs. Ignored for non-test packs.
     - The path to a directory within the pack that contains tests, defined relative to the pack directory. Use ``.`` to specify the whole pack. Any queries in this directory are run as tests when ``test run`` is run with the ``--strict-test-discovery`` option. These queries are ignored by query suite definitions that use ``queries`` or ``qlpack`` instructions to ask for all queries in a particular pack. If this property is missing, then ``.`` is assumed.
   * - ``dbscheme``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        dbscheme: semmlecode.python.dbscheme

     - Core language packs only
     - The path to the :ref:`database schema <codeql-database-schema>` for all libraries and queries written for this CodeQL language (see example below).
   * - ``upgrades``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        upgrades: .

     - Core language packs only

>      - The path to a directory within the pack that contains upgrade scripts, defined relative to the pack directory. The ``database upgrade`` action uses these scripts to upgrade databases that were created by an older version of an extractor or downgrade databases that were created by a newer version of the extractor so they're compatible with the current extractor (see `Upgrade scripts for a language <#upgrade-scripts-for-a-language>`__ below.)

Author: I think we can do better. Upgrade/downgrades are now implicit and now transparent to the user.

For example, if a ``qlpack.yml`` file contains the following dependencies:

.. code-block:: yaml

   dependencies:
     codeql/cpp-all: ^0.1.2
     my-user/my-lib: ^0.2.3
     other-dependency/from-source: "*"

The ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file will contain something like the following:

.. code-block:: yaml

   dependencies:
     codeql/cpp-all:
       version: 0.1.4
     my-user/my-lib:
       version: 0.2.4
     my-user/transitive-dependency:
       version: 1.2.4

> The ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency is locked to version 0.1.4. The ``my-user/my-lib`` dependency is locked to version 0.2.4. The ``my-user/transitive-dependency``, which is a transitive dependency and is not specified in the ``qlpack.yml`` file, is locked to version 1.2.4. The ``other-dependency/from-source`` is absent from the lock file since it is resolved from source. This dependency must be available in the same CodeQL workspace as the pack.

Reviewer 5: Do we document what it means for a pack to be resolved from source?

Author: We aren't yet. That will happen in a later change, in a new article that describes how query resolution occurs.

We should add a TODO here to remind ourselves to add a link to that article here when we create it.

.. _custom-codeql-packs:

Examples of custom CodeQL packs
-------------------------------

When you write custom queries or tests, you should save them in custom CodeQL packs. For simplicity, try to organize each pack logically. For more information, see `CodeQL pack structure <#codeql-pack-structure>`__. Save files for queries and tests in separate packs and, where possible, organize custom packs into specific folders for each target language. This is particuarly useful if you intend to publish your CodeQL packs so they can be shared with others or used in GitHub `Code scanning <https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/secure-coding/automatically-scanning-your-code-for-vulnerabilities-and-errors/about-code-scanning>`__.

CodeQL packs for custom queries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A custom CodeQL pack for queries must include a ``qlpack.yml`` file at the pack root, containing ``name``, ``version``, and ``dependencies`` properties. If the pack contains query suites, you can use the ``suites`` property to define their location. Query suites defined here are called "well-known" suites, and can be used on the command line by referring to their name only, rather than their full path. For more information about query suites, see ":doc:`Creating CodeQL query suites <creating-codeql-query-suites>`."

Reviewer 5: The first sentence here seems a bit redundant with the "qlpack.yml properties" section (and custom CodeQL packs presumably must also contain `codeql-pack.lock.yml` files?)

CodeQL packs for custom test files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For custom CodeQL packs containing test files, you also need to include an
``extractor`` property so that the ``test run`` command knows how to create test
databases. You may also wish to specify the ``tests`` property.

.. include:: ../reusables/test-qlpack.rst

For more information about running tests, see ":doc:`Testing custom queries
<testing-custom-queries>`."

.. _standard-ql-packs:

Examples of CodeQL packs in the CodeQL repository
---------------------------------------------~~~~

Each of the languages in the CodeQL repository has four main CodeQL packs:

- Core library pack for the language, with the :ref:`database schema <codeql-database-schema>`
  used by the language, and CodeQL libraries, and queries at ``ql/<language>/ql/lib``
- Core query pack for the language that includes the default queries for the language, along
  with their query suites at ``ql/<language>/ql/src``
- Tests for the core language libraries and queries at ``ql/<language>/ql/test``

> - Example queries for the language at ``ql/<language>/ql/examples``

Reviewer 5: I think these paths shouldn't have a `ql/` prefix.

Author: Yes.

Core library pack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``qlpack.yml`` file for a core library pack uses the following properties:

Reviewer 5: Also `library` and `upgrades`?

Author: I'll include them.

``name``, ``version``, ``dbscheme``.
The ``dbscheme`` property should only be defined in the core QL
pack for a language.

For example, the ``qlpack.yml`` file for `C/C++ analysis libraries
<https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/main/cpp/ql/lib/qlpack.yml>`__
contains:

.. code-block:: yaml

   name: codeql/cpp-all
   version: x.y.z-dev
   dbscheme: semmlecode.cpp.dbscheme
   library: true
   upgrades: upgrades

Core query pack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``qlpack.yml`` file for a core query pack uses the following properties:

Reviewer 5: Nit: perhaps list these in the same order as the example.

          codeql/cpp-all: ^0.0.2

     - Packs that define CodeQL package dependencies on other packs
     - A map from pack references to the semantic version range that is compatible with this pack. Supported for CLI versions v2.6.0 and later.
   * - ``defaultSuiteFile``
     - .. code-block:: yaml

        defaultSuiteFile: cpp-code-scanning.qls

     - Packs that export a set of default queries to run

>      - The path to a query suite file relative to the package root, containing all of the queries that are run by default when this pack is passed to the ``codeql database analyze`` command. Supported from CLI version v2.6.0 and onwards. Only one of ``defaultSuiteFile`` or ``defaultSuite`` can be defined.

Reviewer 5: Nit: we say something like "Supported from CLI version v2.6.0 and onwards." in a few different ways throughout.  We could make it more consistent, e.g. using "Supported by CLI versions v2.6.0 and later." throughout.

Author: I'm a little torn about including versioning at all.

1. If we are including a version constraint for this feature, we should be including it for all packaging-related features, and all other new features.
2. How far back do we need to maintain documentation for? 
3. In 2.6.0, the implementation was not complete, so even though this feature was supported, I would still recommend using a later version if you really wanted to use packaging.
4. We don't have any published packs supported by 2.6.0. I think the first packs in the registry were available from 2.7.3.

@jf205 can you give some advice on this? 

Perhaps, we can do a final pass after the docs are written and add version constraints to features where appropriate.

Reviewer 4: You're right, adding versions for this is tricky. It might be less confusing for users if we simply update the reusable beta note to include a more up to date version of the CLI. If users really want to check what's supported in a really old version of the CLI they can check the changelog.

        upgrades: .

     - Core language packs only

>      - The path to a directory within the pack that contains database upgrade scripts, defined relative to the pack directory. Database upgrades are used internally to ensure a databasae created with a different version of the CodeQL CLI is compatible with the current version.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
     - The path to a directory within the pack that contains database upgrade scripts, defined relative to the pack directory. Database upgrades are used internally to ensure a database created with a different version of the CodeQL CLI is compatible with the current version.
```

     my-user/transitive-dependency:
       version: 1.2.4

..
  TODO: Add a link to the CodeQL CLI documentation for query resolution, specifically in regards to resolving from source

The ``codeql/cpp-all`` dependency is locked to version 0.1.4. The ``my-user/my-lib`` dependency is locked to version 0.2.4. The ``my-user/transitive-dependency``, which is a transitive dependency and is not specified in the ``qlpack.yml`` file, is locked to version 1.2.4. The ``other-dependency/from-source`` is absent from the lock file since it is resolved from source. This dependency must be available in the same CodeQL workspace as the pack.

> In most cases, the ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file is only relevant for query packs since library packs are non-executable and usually do not need their transitive dependencies to be fixed. The exception to this is for library packs that contain tests. In this case, the ``codeql-pack.lock.yml`` file is used to ensure that the tests are always run with the same versions of dependencies to avoid spurious failures when there are mismatched dependencies.

Reviewer 3: I'm not 100% sure, but I believe that lock files for library packs may also influence the VS Code QL language server, especially if the repo has only library packs. So, it's not just for tests. That said, I think this paragraph that just mentions tests is fine.

Reviewer 2: On line 26 we say that lock files are relevant for Query packs. It's possible that we should make a minor update to that line since it sounds as if you may get a lock file with all pack types?

Each of the languages in the CodeQL repository has four main CodeQL packs:

- Core library pack for the language, with the :ref:`database schema <codeql-database-schema>`
  used by the language, and CodeQL libraries, and queries at ``<language>/ql/lib``
- Core query pack for the language that includes the default queries for the language, along
  with their query suites at ``<language>/ql/src``
- Tests for the core language libraries and queries at ``<language>/ql/test``
- Example queries for the language at ``<language>/ql/examples``

Core library pack
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Here is an example ``qlpack.yml`` file for `C/C++ analysis libraries

Reviewer 5: (throughout)

```suggestion
Here is an example ``qlpack.yml`` file for the `C/C++ analysis libraries
```

   library: true
   upgrades: upgrades

Some extra notes on the following properties:

- ``library``: Indicates that this is a library pack with no executable queries. It is only meant to be used as a dependency for other packs.

> - ``dbscheme`` and ``upgrades``: Properties internal to the CodeQL CLI and should only be defined in the core QL pack for a language.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- ``dbscheme`` and ``upgrades``: These properties are internal to the CodeQL CLI and should only be defined in the core QL pack for a language.
```
